This is a very important question. Weather has a
tremendous affect on peoples daily lives. For
instance, it is raining today and looking outside
I see far fewer joggers and bikers out today than
on typical sunny days in Santa Barbara. People who
are outside are wearing warmer (and more) clothing
than they normally do, and are making no attempt
to linger outside or sunbathe, but instead hurry
around to try to rush back inside as fast as
possible.
As long as were on the topic of
weather, we might as well discuss climate too. It
is commonly said, climate is what you expect (or
predict), and weather is what you get. This is
another way of saying that weather represents the
conditions at a specific location on a specific
day, while climate is the average conditions over
many years. Both have a great impact on how we
live, but climate tends to affect lifestyle,
social structure, and culture, whereas weather
affects daily choices such as those described
above. Weather and climate to a large degree
determine how we stay warm (or cool) enough to
survive, how (and if) we stay comfortable, what
modes of transportation we use, what type of
clothing we wear, what foods we can grow and eat
in an area, and what resources (such as water and
trees) are plentiful or rare.
Weather
sometimes has some less obvious affects on the way
we live, too. For instance, weather patterns
control the ocean as well as the land. During
storms, we see bigger waves that carry away more
sand from our beaches and can destroy kelp
forests, washing huge mats of drift kelp onto the
beaches. If you are a SCUBA diver or surfer, these
factors will have an important effect on your
recreational life. Storms also cause a lot of
runoff to wash dirt from streets into rivers and
streams and out to the ocean, where they may have
an impact on bacteria levels in the ocean (many
surfers supposedly get sick from bacteria in the
water after large storms). Weather patterns can
also control fish populations in some areas and
have a large effect on fishermen that harvest
these fish (and the people who eat the
fish).
Here in southern California, it
doesn't rain very often so most farmers have to
irrigate their fields with water from elsewhere in
order to grow food. This creates competition for
limited water resources between farming and other
interests, such as drinking water, recreation
(e.g., swimming pools) and landscaping. Climate
and weather strongly control what fruits and
vegetables can grow. For instance, next time you
visit the supermarket, look at the labels on the
fruits and vegetables to see where they are from.
Many of them will likely be from California
because we can grow a huge variety of food here
for two reasons: 1) there are many different
climates in California, and 2) many of the
climates are favorable for the growth of many of
the foods we like to eat. However, you may find
some foods that are not grown in California for
one of two reasons: 1) that fruit or vegetable
cannot grow well enough here to be farmed (such as
pineapples), or 2) that fruit or vegetable only
grows during certain seasons here and so must be
imported from other countries when it is not
growing here (such as grapes and
apples).
Another important aspect of
weather that has a huge effect on our lives is
extreme weather events, such as hurricanes,
droughts, fires (forest fires), floods, heat
waves, or cold snaps and winter storms. For
instance, about a dozen people died last year in
La Conchita when an anomalously wet rain season
caused landslides that buried several houses. The
summer before last, thousands died in Europe
during an extreme heat wave, and thousands died
recently in the southeast during a horrible
hurricane season. Some of these extreme events may
be consequences of climate change caused by humans
and the burning of fossil fuels, while others are
just periodic events that happen very
infrequently. In many cases, these extreme events
are more catastrophic now due to higher human
populations. For instance, droughts that cause
crops to fail and water sources to dry up are
probably harder on areas with many people to feed
and water than on areas with fewer
people.
There is really no end to the ways
that weather and climate affect our lives. I
encourage you to look at the things you on a daily
basis and think about how they are affected by the
weather and climate. Also think about how you live
might change when the weather changes here or if
different extreme weather events were to occur in
this area. Finally, think about how weather
changes that occur elsewhere might affect the way
you live. For instance, if there were a drought in
an area that grows foods that you eat, how
would your shopping and eating habits be affected?
This is a very important question. Weather has a
tremendous affect on peoples daily lives. For
instance, it is raining today and looking outside
I see far fewer joggers and bikers out today than
on typical sunny days in Santa Barbara. People who
are outside are wearing warmer (and more) clothing
than they normally do, and are making no attempt
to linger outside or sunbathe, but instead hurry
around to try to rush back inside as fast as
possible.As long as were on the topic of
weather, we might as well discuss climate too. It
is commonly said, climate is what you expect (or
predict), and weather is what you get. This is
another way of saying that weather represents the
conditions at a specific location on a specific
day, while climate is the average conditions over
many years. Both have a great impact on how we
live, but climate tends to affect lifestyle,
social structure, and culture, whereas weather
affects daily choices such as those described
above. Weather and climate to a large degree
determine how we stay warm (or cool) enough to
survive, how (and if) we stay comfortable, what
modes of transportation we use, what type of
clothing we wear, what foods we can grow and eat
in an area, and what resources (such as water and
trees) are plentiful or rare.Weather
sometimes has some less obvious affects on the way
we live, too. For instance, weather patterns
control the ocean as well as the land. During
storms, we see bigger waves that carry away more
sand from our beaches and can destroy kelp
forests, washing huge mats of drift kelp onto the
beaches. If you are a SCUBA diver or surfer, these
factors will have an important effect on your
recreational life. Storms also cause a lot of
runoff to wash dirt from streets into rivers and
streams and out to the ocean, where they may have
an impact on bacteria levels in the ocean (many
surfers supposedly get sick from bacteria in the
water after large storms). Weather patterns can
also control fish populations in some areas and
have a large effect on fishermen that harvest
these fish (and the people who eat the
fish).Here in southern California, it
doesn't rain very often so most farmers have to
irrigate their fields with water from elsewhere in
order to grow food. This creates competition for
limited water resources between farming and other
interests, such as drinking water, recreation
(e.g., swimming pools) and landscaping. Climate
and weather strongly control what fruits and
vegetables can grow. For instance, next time you
visit the supermarket, look at the labels on the
fruits and vegetables to see where they are from.
Many of them will likely be from California
because we can grow a huge variety of food here
for two reasons: 1) there are many different
climates in California, and 2) many of the
climates are favorable for the growth of many of
the foods we like to eat. However, you may find
some foods that are not grown in California for
one of two reasons: 1) that fruit or vegetable
cannot grow well enough here to be farmed (such as
pineapples), or 2) that fruit or vegetable only
grows during certain seasons here and so must be
imported from other countries when it is not
growing here (such as grapes and
apples).Another important aspect of
weather that has a huge effect on our lives is
extreme weather events, such as hurricanes,
droughts, fires (forest fires), floods, heat
waves, or cold snaps and winter storms. For
instance, about a dozen people died last year in
La Conchita when an anomalously wet rain season
caused landslides that buried several houses. The
summer before last, thousands died in Europe
during an extreme heat wave, and thousands died
recently in the southeast during a horrible
hurricane season. Some of these extreme events may
be consequences of climate change caused by humans
and the burning of fossil fuels, while others are
just periodic events that happen very
infrequently. In many cases, these extreme events
are more catastrophic now due to higher human
populations. For instance, droughts that cause
crops to fail and water sources to dry up are
probably harder on areas with many people to feed
and water than on areas with fewer
people.There is really no end to the ways
that weather and climate affect our lives. I
encourage you to look at the things you on a daily
basis and think about how they are affected by the
weather and climate. Also think about how you live
might change when the weather changes here or if
different extreme weather events were to occur in
this area. Finally, think about how weather
changes that occur elsewhere might affect the way
you live. For instance, if there were a drought in
an area that grows foods that you eat, how
would your shopping and eating habits be affected?
Weather affects us in a huge number of ways.
Climate influences the growth of crops, thus
affecting the availability and kind of food we
eat. Fluctuations in weather (e.g. dry spells, wet
spells) also affect crops. Weather affects what
clothes we wear, and soon. I can't think of
anything we do that weather doesn't have a strong
effect on.Weather affects us in a huge number of ways.
Climate influences the growth of crops, thus
affecting the availability and kind of food we
eat. Fluctuations in weather (e.g. dry spells, wet
spells) also affect crops. Weather affects what
clothes we wear, and soon. I can't think of
anything we do that weather doesn't have a strong
effect on.